myPHPcms Functional Specification

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This Functional Specification defines the project myPHPcms which is a
PHP/MySQL based content management system.  It has been designed from
the outset to make the best of the hardware that it runs on and to be
easy to set-up and administer.

The use a templating system and an HTML library the logical code and
presentation code (HTML) are entirely separated.  Caching of the most 
frequently requested pages will result in a speed increase through the
reduction in database requests.

Modules to expand the site capabilities are planned so that the amount
of functionality required can be extended beyond the basic level that
is defined in this document.

1.0	SCOPE

This document describes the myPHPcms Content Management System which is
to be developed as an Open Source project under the GPL (GNU Public 
License).  

Some CMS's mix the logical code with the presnetation code which makes
modifying the default site design very difficult.  It also makes fixing
software errors diifcult as the code is very convuluted.  Others have
clearly been designed by software engineers and, as such, require a 
detailed understanding of the back-end of the code in order to customise
the site.  This understanding takes time to develop and it is just this
amount of commitment that web masters are reluctant to give.  As a result
many otherwise excellent CMS systems have not had the take up that they
should.

myPHPcms will avoids this trap by separating the logical code and the
presentation code through the use of templates that can be administered
from a web interface.  Any HTML that needs to be generated on-the-fly
can be created using an HTML generation library included and documented
with this package.

Add information on basic functionality.

2.0	REFERENCE DOCUMENTATION

None (at this time).

3.0	HARDWARE REQUIREMENTS

The hardware requirements are modest - any server capable of running
Apache, MySQL and PHP should be able to run myPHPcms.  However, in 
order to improve the user experience, the fastest hardware available
should be used.

4.0	SOFTWARE REQUIREMENTS

Any recent version of Linux (2.2.14 or higher) can be used.  A recent
vesion of Apache (1.3.17 or higher) and MySQL (3.23.27 or higher) are
also required.

5.0	GENERAL REQUIREMENTS AND ASSUMPTIONS

Access to database server running MySQL
Permission to allow the creation and access to a database on this server
Adequate disk space to install the scripts that comprise myPHPcms
No detailed knowledge of MySQL or PHP is required to set-up the software
as an INSTALL script is provided.

6.0	SOFTWARE ENVIRONMENT

* Define base modules
* Define directory structure
* INSTALL script to create SQL tables and set permissions

7.0	PERFORMANCE

* Moderately detailed description of templating and caching system

APP A	TECHNICAL NOTES

